Spack user survey 2020 blog post (#31)
spack/spack.io: _posts/2020-12-02-spack-user-survey-2020.md

There's probably a lot of overlap between these lists, so this may not be
as wide an audience as it would seem. It's probably biased towards U.S.
users, as the people on the mailing lists are very U.S.-centric. So,
while the sample is by no means scientific, we know at least that it
covers a lot of Spack users.

## Data

The results are summarized here, but you can get the full data set and
the scripts we used to generate these charts
[here](https://github.com/spack/spack-user-survey). There are a lot of
results -- let us know if you find anything interesting that we missed.

## Thanks!

Thanks to the 169 users who filled out the survey, both for this feedback
and for your continuing contributions to Spack! This project wouldn't be
possible without the community!

# Demographics

In this section of the survey, we tried to understand the composition of
the Spack community.

## ECP and Spack

The first question we asked was whether respondents were part of ECP.

<figure>
  <a href="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/pie_in_ecp.svg">
    <img src="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/pie_in_ecp.svg">
  </a>
</figure>

> ECP is just over a third of the community (~35%, or 61 of 169

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ECP represents just over a third of the community (~35%, or 61 of 169
```

respondents). It includes people from both sides of the U.S. Department
of Energy -- [NNSA](https://www.energy.gov/nnsa/) laboratories like

> [LLNL](https://llnl.gov), [LANL](https://lanl.gov), and

Reviewer: URL doesn't work w/o www
```suggestion
[LLNL](https://www.llnl.gov), [LANL](https://lanl.gov), and
```

focusing on delivering a software stack for the first U.S. exascale
machines, which includes upcoming systems like:

* LBL's [Perlmutter](https://www.nersc.gov/systems/perlmutter/): AMD CPU /
  NVIDIA GPU (pre-exascale)
* ANL's [Aurora](https://www.alcf.anl.gov/aurora): Intel CPU / Intel GPU
* ORNL's [Frontier](https://www.olcf.ornl.gov/frontier/): AMD CPU / AMD GPU
* LLNL's [El Capitan](https://www.llnl.gov/news/llnl-and-hpe-partner-amd-el-capitan-projected-worlds-fastest-supercomputer): AMD CPU / AMD GPU

All of these are HPE/Cray systems, but the hardware is quite diverse
(particularly the GPUs). We wanted to see whether the users at the
bleeding edge of HPC had significantly different needs from the Spack
community as a whole. So, in most of the following sections, we present
responses for Spack and for ECP separately.

## What kind of user are you?

We asked users what their role was at their organization.

<figure>
  <a href="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_pies_user_type.svg">
    <img src="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_pies_user_type.svg">
  </a>
</figure>

Spack was originally targeted at user support teams and system

> administrators, but by far the largest parts of the community are end end

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
administrators, but by far the largest parts of the community are end
```

> users (scientists/researchers) installing software on HPC machines (41%)
> and software developers (35%). System administrators were ~11% of the
> overall community, and user support staff were only 8%. In ECP, this is
> even more pronounced -- only a small fraction of respondents identified
> as system administrators, and developers were nearly 44% of the ECP user

Reviewer: Looking at the blue & orange segments of the pies, are the percentages backward?
```suggestion
users (scientists/researchers) installing software on HPC machines (35%)
and software developers (41%). System administrators were ~11% of the
overall community, and user support staff were only 8%. In ECP, this is
even more pronounced -- only a small fraction of respondents identified
as system administrators, and developers were nearly 43% of the ECP user
```

  </a>
</figure>

Both in and outside ECP, about half of Spack users hear about the tool
via word of mouth. This result made us pretty happy -- we think it means
that users are very willing to recommend Spack to friends. After word of
mouth, 22% people heard of Spack because it was used at their site.
Within ECP this was slightly more likely at 30%.

24% of users heard about Spack from outreach activities: tutorials, BOF
sessions, and presentations.

## How long have you been using Spack?

<figure>
  <a href="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_bars_how_long_using.svg">
    <img src="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_bars_how_long_using.svg">
  </a>
</figure>

Spack usage has been growing over time, and the number of users who join
the community each year is increasing. Most of the overall community has
been using Spack for less than two years. We also see this effect in the
number of contributors to the project on GitHub. In 2018, after the
project had been publicly available for 4 years, there were around 300
contributors. 2 years later, there are nearly 700.

Within ECP, the community is older -- most people started using Spack in

> ECP 2-3 years ago. There has been less adoption since then, but we
> attribute this to Spack's rapid adoption in ECP. Spack caught on quickly

Reviewer: Slightly confusing. ECP doesn't have newer adoptions b/c Spack is already de facto, per the subsequent sentences.
```suggestion
ECP 2-3 years ago. There has been less new adoption since then, which we
attribute to Spack's rapid adoption in ECP. Spack caught on quickly
```

of users *into* ECP. The population stays mostly the same over time.

## Have you contributed to Spack?

<figure>
  <a href="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_multi_bars_how_contributed.svg">
    <img src="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_multi_bars_how_contributed.svg">
  </a>
</figure>

Around 75% of users who responded have contributed to Spack in some way
or another, and most of those (60%) have contributed a package. Nearly
40% of users are active on Slack, and nearly 40% have filed issues on
GitHub.

It's notable that Slack discussions are *far* more active than the Spack
mailing list -- users seem to want to engage live rather than sending
emails back and forth.

Not many users (~10%) have contributed to documentation, but even this
small amount helps the project -- this is around 16 people.

There don't seem to be any special takeaways here for ECP, except that
ECP users seem to be slightly more likely to contribute a package (nearly
70% have done so).

# Spack Usage

Having characterized the user base, we moved on to finding out how they
use Spack.

## What version(s) of Spack do you use?

> <figure>

Reviewer: Is there a meaningful difference between "not sure" and "do not know"? Should those responses be combined in the graph?

Author: good point -- fixed

  <a href="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_multi_bars_spack_versions.svg">
    <img src="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_multi_bars_spack_versions.svg">
  </a>
</figure>

Spack users like to be on the bleeding edge, and it shows up the versions
of Spack they use. Just under 60% of users are using the `develop` branch
of Spack, and the number is higher (~65%) in ECP. The next most popular

> version was 0.15, which was the latest latest Spack release at the time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
version was 0.15, which was the latest Spack release at the time
```

of this survey.

Comparatively few users were on older versions, though a very small
number of people were using 0.10. A lot has happened since then -- 0.10
was released in January 2017, and there were around 1,000 packages then
(vs. 5,000 now). We hope the users still on 0.10 will upgrade -- both for
features and for package fixes.

## What OS do you use Spack on?

<figure class="half">
  <a href="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_multi_bars_os_simple.svg">
    <img src="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_multi_bars_os_simple.svg">
  </a>
  <a href="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_multi_bars_os.svg">
    <img src="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_multi_bars_os.svg">
  </a>
  <figcaption>
    OS's of Spack users ignoring (left) and considering (right) specific Linux
    distributions.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

Spack is targeted at HPC, so it's no surprise that nearly 100% of users
are using it on Linux. What users sometimes
[forget](https://twitter.com/HPC_James/status/1329238400596123653) is
that Spack also works on macOS. Around 35% of all users run Spack on
their macs, and over half the users within ECP are also running it on

> macOS. A small number of users (< 10%) are running Spack within the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
macOS. A small number of users (<10%) are running Spack within the
```

operating systems, including Red Hat 7 and CentOS 7, and on Red Hat and
CentOS 6 (which are still used at some sites) the default is 2.6.

While many projects can pick their version of Python, Spack is often the
tool people use to *install* newer versions of Python, and we don't want
to make users use another installer just to install Spack's dependencies.
We want it to work out of the box, so we try to make Spack work with the
system Python everywhere.

## How bad would it be if Spack dropped support for Python 2.6?

<figure>
  <a href="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_pies_how_bad_no_py26.svg">
    <img src="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_pies_how_bad_no_py26.svg">
  </a>
</figure>

We asked whether it would be OK for us to drop Python 2.6, and we found
that there are still around 4 hold-outs who really need Spack to work on
Python 2.6, and over 20% of people would be at least mildly
inconvenienced by this change. For the time being, we'll keep supporting
Python 2.6, but you can probably expect its deprecation to be announced
sometime within the next year, as the last few Red Hat 6 installations
dwindle.

> ## How bad would it be if Spack only worked with Python 3?

Reviewer: Not necessarily to the analysis, but it might be interesting to know if Spack's continued support for Python 2 draws users vs EasyBuild. Or perhaps Spack & EasyBuild are comparable in this regard?

Author: They're both currently supporting 2.6 and up.  EB has deprecated 2.6 but I don't think it matters here.

<figure>
  <a href="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_pies_how_bad_only_py3.svg">
    <img src="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_pies_how_bad_only_py3.svg">
  </a>
</figure>

Eventually, we'd like to drop Python 2 entirely, but with 40% of users
still using 2.7, and with 36% of users likely to be bothered by the
shift, we'll hold off on dropping 2.7, as well. Interestingly, while ECP

> users were less likely that the broader community to completely oppose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
users were less likely than the broader community to completely oppose
```

    <img src="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_multi_bars_how_use_pkgs_any.svg">
  </a>
  </figure>

The most common way to use Spack packages is still through modules, and
module usage seems to be split about evenly between Lmod and TCL modules,
with some overlap. We were surprised to see that the `spack load` command
is the second most popular way to use Spack packages, only a few
percentage points behind modules.

We don't have data on past usage of `spack load`, but we've tried to make
it easy to use everywhere, and this may have caused its usage to
increase. In particular, in earlier Spack releases, `spack load`
*required* modules in order to work (it was a thin layer around `module
load`). As of
[Spack `0.14`](https://github.com/spack/spack/releases/tag/v0.14.0) in
early 2020, it only requires Spack's own environment support -- so you
can easily load a one-off package on your mac or personal Linux box where
you don't already have modules installed.

After `spack load`, around 35% of users are making use of Spack
environments to load groups of packages together. Like `spack load`,
Spack environments require no support from the module system -- they work

> regardless of where Spack is deployed and they provide be a more portable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
regardless of where Spack is deployed and provide a more portable
```

(at least on our list here). Around 2/3 of users say they use
environments. environments can be used to add packages to `PATH`, to
maintain a list of dependencies via `spack.yaml`, to version a
`spack.yaml` environment in a repo, to do
[combinatorial builds](https://spack-tutorial.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorial_stacks.html),
to reproduce builds with `spack.lock`, to configure and run
[CI pipelines](https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/pipelines.html),
and to
[build container images](https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/containers.html).

# Looking Ahead

We wanted to get a sense of what users will need from Spack in the coming
year, so we asked about upcoming architectures, Spack features, and
events.

## Which CPUs do you expect to use with Spack in the next year?

<figure>
  <a href="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_multi_bars_cpus_next_year.svg">
    <img src="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_multi_bars_cpus_next_year.svg">
  </a>
</figure>

Nearly everyone in the Spack community plans to run on Intel CPUs in the
next year, and around 80% expect to use Spack to build for AMD systems.

> just over 40% of users will run on ARM and just under 40% will run on

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Just over 40% of users will run on ARM and just under 40% will run on
```

Power. Within ECP, the percentage of users that want to run on any of the
non-Intel CPUs is larger -- as you might expect, ECP is targeting a more
diverse set of architectures. There were many more ECP users who expected
to run on Power than in the broader community, likely because the current
top two U.S. systems, Summit and Sierra, are Power machines.

We can't draw a fair comparison with EasyBuild on this question, as
EasyBuild's survey asked users what CPUs they were *currently* using
rather than what they expected to be using in the next year. Even if it's
to be taken with a grain of salt, the difference is still worth
mentioning. In the
[EasyBuild survey](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ppKVsnwba7g#t=30m06s),
the vast majority of users were similarly running on Intel machines. But,

> less than 20% of were using AMD chips, less than 5% were using Power, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
less than 20% were using AMD chips, less than 5% were using Power, and
```

only one user reported using ARM.

## Which GPUs do you expect to use with Spack in the next year?

<figure>

>   <a href="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_multi_bars_gpus_next_year_any.svg">
>     <img src="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_multi_bars_gpus_next_year_any.svg">
>   </a>

Reviewer 2: This image doesn't seem to be there. So I guess it's either:
```suggestion
  <a href="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_multi_bars_gpus_next_year.svg">
    <img src="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_multi_bars_gpus_next_year.svg">
  </a>
```
or an image is missing.

Author: Hm guess I forgot to check this in. This has another bar for “any GPU” — I’ll check it in in the morning

Author: added the image

you might expect, 80% of ECP users expect to use AMD GPUs and over half
expect to use Intel GPUs.

[GPU usage in the EasyBuild community](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ppKVsnwba7g#t=31m17s)
was similarly high -- 96.5% of EasyBuild users were compiling software
for GPUs -- so it's pretty clear that GPUs have become pervasive in HPC.

## Which compilers do you expect to use with Spack in the next year?

<figure>
  <a href="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_multi_bars_compilers_next_year.svg">
    <img src="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_multi_bars_compilers_next_year.svg">
  </a>
</figure>

As you might expect given the CPU and GPU results, Spack users
anticipate using a very wide range of compilers. `gcc` is still king,
with almost 100% of users expecting to use it, and LLVM and Intel
compilers are next on the list.

Interestingly, only around 60% planned to use `nvcc`, and a bit more than
40% planned to use NVIDIA's HPC compilers. Given that over 90% of users
said they expected to build on NVIDIA GPUs, we're tempted to explain the
discrepancy by saying that a large percentage of users expect to use

> NVIDIA GPUs GPUs not through CUDA directly, but through GPU-optimized

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NVIDIA GPUs not through CUDA directly, but through GPU-optimized
```

libraries or through compiler capabilities like OpenMP offload. The same
can probably be said for AMD and Intel GPUs -- the percentage of users
who plan to run with compilers specifically intended for these GPUs was
consistently lower than the number of users who anticipated using them.

## Rank upcoming Spack features by importance

> <figure>

Reviewer: I'm on the fence about the colors in these graphs, which could be reversed. When I first scanned this graph, I thought Windows support was the most important feature. Obviously the opposite is true when reading more closely. Red can be interpreted as "critical" as in "high importance" (like an email with an exclamation mark) or "my progress is limited w/o this feature." But you're using green for "critical" to imply something like "the feature is in our work queue" or "the feature has the greenlight." The detailed explanation of the data is fine; I'm just saying the colors threw me off a bit for what they were showing. Color isn't as important in the other graphs, and the red-green spectrum in the "How would you rate the overall quality" section below totally makes sense.

Author: This is a good point.  Do you have an opinion on which color map we should use?  https://matplotlib.org/tutorials/colors/colormaps.html

Author: Both are currently using `RdYlGn`, but maybe a 2-color scale would be better here since it's more of a continuum and not positive vs. negative.

Author: Ok made this use blues.  I think we're done now.

  <figcaption>
    Feature ratings by workplace (left) and by job type (right).
  </figcaption>
</figure>

In addition to the community-wide averages above, we looked at whether
different segments of the community rated features differently. On the
right above, we split out average feature ratings by workplace, and on
the left we split them out by job type.

Overall, the rank order of features was similar across different
workplaces and job types. Reusing existing installs and the new
concretizer were consistently at the top of everyone's list, and the
lowest-rated features had low ratings across the board. Industry users
prioritized cloud integration noticeably higher than other groups, and
user support staff placed a much higher value on package testing than
other job types (perhaps because they are involved in more package
testing efforts at their sites). Managers and ASCR labs rated separate
build dependencies lower than other groups. Other than these outliers
there were not significant deviations from the overall order of
preference.

There are some noticeable trends *across* groups. System administrators,
user support staff, and industry users tended to rate features as less

> important across the board. It's hard to know to interpret this -- it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
important across the board. It's hard to know how to interpret this -- it
```

actually started planning for an inaugural Spack User Meeting earlier this
year. That fell apart when the pandemic hit. Other similar tools have had
good luck with meetings like this (e.g.,
[NixCon](https://2020.nixcon.org/) and the
[EasyBuild User Meeting](https://github.com/easybuilders/easybuild/wiki/5th-EasyBuild-User-Meeting)),
so we asked users what they thought of a potentially virtual meeting:

<figure>
  <a href="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_pies_would_attend_workshop.svg">
    <img src="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_pies_would_attend_workshop.svg">
  </a>
</figure>

Just over half of users (over 85 people) said they would attend, and 8
said they'd be willing to present on their work. That seems like more
than enough for an initial Spack meeting, so expect us to announce
something for 2021.

# Getting Help

We're interested in making it easier to learn about Spack, so we asked
people how they're doing it now.

## Have you done a Spack tutorial?

<figure>
  <a href="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_pies_did_tutorial.svg">
    <img src="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_pies_did_tutorial.svg">
  </a>
</figure>

> We were surprised to see that over 60% of all our users have done a Spack
> tutorial. Since 2016, We've been doing Spack tutorials at conferences

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We were surprised to see that over 60% of all our users have done a [Spack
tutorial](https://spack-tutorial.readthedocs.io/en/latest/). Since 2016, We've been doing Spack tutorials at conferences
```

like [Supercomputing](https://supercomputing.org/),
[ISC](https://www.isc-hpc.com/), and
[PEARC](https://pearc.acm.org/pearc19/workshops-and-tutorials/), and this
year we had over 125 attendees at our virtual
[Spack tutorial on AWS](https://spack-tutorial.workshop.aws/). This seems
to show that tutorials have been a very effective form of outreach, even
if they aren't the main way people first hear about Spack (per our

> [earlier question](http://localhost:4000/spack-user-survey-2020/#how-did-you-find-out-about-spack).

Reviewer 2: Missing closing parenthesis:
```suggestion
[earlier question](http://localhost:4000/spack-user-survey-2020/#how-did-you-find-out-about-spack)).
```

At the very least, they likely contribute to the
[high rate of contribution](http://localhost:4000/spack-user-survey-2020/#have-you-contributed-to-spack)
in the community.

## How do you get help with Spack when you need it?

<figure>
  <a href="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_multi_bars_how_get_help.svg">
    <img src="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_multi_bars_how_get_help.svg">
  </a>
</figure>

> Users go to the docs more than any other place for help with Spack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users go to [the docs](https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) more than any other place for help with Spack.
```

[all the types of workplaces](http://localhost:4000/spack-user-survey-2020/#where-do-you-work)
that we considered.

## How often do you consult the Spack documentation?

<figure>
  <a href="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_pies_how_often_docs.svg">
    <img src="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_pies_how_often_docs.svg">
  </a>
</figure>

Users consult the documentation reasonably frequently -- weekly to
monthly for most. A small fraction (14%) check it daily. ECP users check
the documentation less frequently on average than the community as a
whole, but
[ECP users have also been using Spack for longer](http://localhost:4000/spack-user-survey-2020/#how-long-have-you-been-using-spack),
and are likely more familiar with it.

## If there were commercial support for Spack, would you or your organization buy it?

<figure>
  <a href="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_pies_commercial_support.svg">
    <img src="/assets/images/spack-user-survey-2020/two_pies_commercial_support.svg">
  </a>
</figure>

We don't have any plans to provide commercial support for Spack at the
moment, but it's nice to know that 23%, or 39 users and their

> organizations might be willing to pay for it. That's a fairly large

Reviewer: ```suggestion
organizations, might be willing to pay for it. That's a fairly large
```

While some users have
[praised the documentation](https://twitter.com/owainkenway/status/1283075361740333058),
a lot of documentation has accumulated and it likely needs to be
organized better. Spack targets
[many different kinds of users](http://localhost:4000/spack-user-survey-2020/#what-kind-of-user-are-you),
and there is not just one workflow. We've gotten a lot of requests to
provide clearer how-to guides for common site deployment and developer
workflows, which is something we plan to work on over the next year.

Spack packages are a harder problem. The package DSL is part of what
makes Spack unique -- there is one template for each package, and the
same template lets you build any version or configuration of a package.
This makes it easier to port Spack packages to new systems, but it also
makes the testing surface for Spack packages *very* large. We think we
are still on the right path, for several reasons:

* Together with Kitware, we've built up a sophisticated CI system using
  the support for
  [pipelines](https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/pipelines.html)
  built into Spack environments.
* We've hooked up our GitLab instance to Spack's main GitHub repository,

>   and Within the next couple of weeks, we'll be testing a subset of Spack

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  and within the next couple of weeks, we'll be testing a subset of Spack
```

  builds on *every* pull request.
* These are the same builds used to produce ECP's
  [Extreme Scale Scientific Software Stack (E4S)](https://e4s.io).

One of our priorities for 2021 under ECP is hardening these builds and
testing Spack packages on a wide range of platforms, and now that the new
concretizer is in Spack, we expect to be able to steer Spack

> configurations towards well tested ones, based on builds in our pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configurations towards well-tested ones, based on builds in our pipeline
```

and under E4S. So, we expect package stability to get much better over
the coming year, and we're hoping that it will show up in next year's
survey responses.

# Longer answers

We asked 6 long answer questions. If you want, you can read them all in
the [data repository](https://github.com/spack/spack-user-survey). The
number and length of responses to these was overwhelming, and we haven't
come up with a great way to summarize them, but reading them all gave us
a great picture of what people in the community are up to. We've picked a
few responses per question and quoted them below.

## Tell us briefly about your use case and your usual Spack workflow.

  * *I am using Spack to build the software environment for our users on
    our University's centralized HPC system.*

>   * *Using Spack to build complex applications natively. Moving the the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * *Using Spack to build complex applications natively. Moving the
```
